DEPLOYING APPLICATIONS WITH GIT INTEGRATION

Workshop objective
Attendees will learn how OpenShift consumes code from Git, how branches and credentials are configured, how builds are triggered, and how a source change becomes a new application rollout.

1. Why Git integration matters

Git is the system of record for application source and, in mature teams, deployment configuration. OpenShift can retrieve source directly from a Git repository and use a BuildConfig to create an image. Webhooks or pipelines can then automate delivery after a commit.

A basic integrated flow is:

Git push -> webhook/manual trigger -> Build -> ImageStreamTag -> Deployment rollout -> Pods

This is not automatically a complete production CI/CD solution. Production delivery usually adds tests, image scanning, approvals, environment promotion, and rollback controls through OpenShift Pipelines or another CI/CD platform.

2. Prerequisites

- Access to an OpenShift project.
- A Git repository containing a buildable application.
- A suitable S2I builder or a Dockerfile/Containerfile.
- Network connectivity from the build pod to the Git server.
- A Secret if the repository is private.
- An understood branch, tag, or commit to deploy.

Confirm the current identity and project:

oc whoami
oc project

3. Deploying from a public Git repository

Using an S2I builder:

oc new-app nodejs:20~https://github.com/<organisation>/<repository>.git --name=git-app

Using a repository that contains a Dockerfile/Containerfile:

oc new-build https://github.com/<organisation>/<repository>.git --name=git-app --strategy=docker

Then inspect what OpenShift created:

oc get bc,build,is,deployment,service,pods
oc describe bc/git-app
oc logs -f bc/git-app

With oc new-app, resource generation depends on the input and cluster version. Always inspect the generated objects instead of assuming the exact result.

4. Selecting a branch or context directory

To build a specific branch, append a Git reference:

oc new-app nodejs:20~https://github.com/<organisation>/<repository>.git#develop --name=git-app

For a monorepo, set the context directory so the build uses the correct subfolder:

oc patch bc/git-app --type=merge -p '{"spec":{"source":{"contextDir":"services/api"}}}'

Verify the source configuration:

oc get bc/git-app -o yaml

For reproducible releases, production workflows should promote a tested image or build from an immutable tag/commit rather than following a moving development branch without controls.

5. Accessing a private repository

Create a source Secret using an approved credential method. SSH keys are shown here as an example:

oc create secret generic git-source-secret --from-file=ssh-privatekey=<path-to-private-key> --type=kubernetes.io/ssh-auth

Associate it with the build service account when appropriate:

oc secrets link builder git-source-secret

Or set sourceSecret in the BuildConfig:

spec:
  source:
    git:
      uri: git@github.com:<organisation>/<repository>.git
    sourceSecret:
      name: git-source-secret

Security guidance:

- Prefer short-lived tokens or narrowly scoped deploy keys.
- Never place credentials inside the Git URL, source code, or BuildConfig.
- Restrict Secret access with RBAC.
- Manage host keys and CA certificates according to platform policy.
- Rotate credentials and test revocation procedures.

6. Triggering builds from Git

Manual build:

oc start-build git-app --follow

Webhook-driven build:

oc describe bc/git-app

The BuildConfig can expose a GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket, or generic webhook URL depending on configuration and platform support. Configure that URL in the Git provider and protect its secret token. A webhook means “a change occurred”; build configuration still determines which source is fetched.

Test by making a small commit, pushing it, and observing:

oc get builds -w

In another terminal:

oc get pods -w

This demonstrates the difference between a build event and a deployment rollout.

7. From new image to running application

After a successful build, the output is pushed to an image registry and represented by an ImageStreamTag. An image-change trigger or deployment automation can roll out the new version.

Inspect the image history:

oc describe is/git-app
oc get istag

Inspect deployment progress:

oc rollout status deployment/git-app
oc rollout history deployment/git-app

If the application uses a DeploymentConfig in an older environment:

oc rollout status dc/git-app

Do not mix Deployment and DeploymentConfig commands; first identify the workload type with oc get deployment,dc.

8. Exposing and validating the application

Create a Route for an existing Service:

oc expose service/git-app
oc get route/git-app

Retrieve only the hostname:

oc get route/git-app -o jsonpath='{.spec.host}{"\n"}'

Test the endpoint with a browser or curl. Then confirm the response corresponds to the new commit—for example by displaying an application version or commit identifier.

9. Common failure scenarios

Repository not found or authentication failed: Check URL format, credentials, Secret linkage, branch permissions, and Git provider logs.

Webhook does not trigger: Confirm the webhook URL, secret, event type, delivery status, and external reachability of the OpenShift API endpoint.

Wrong branch built: Inspect spec.source.git.ref and the build logs.

Build succeeds but old version runs: Check the ImageStreamTag, deployment image/change trigger, rollout status, and pod image digest.

Monorepo build cannot find files: Verify contextDir and repository layout.

Useful diagnostic commands:

oc describe bc/git-app
oc get builds
oc logs build/<build-name>
oc describe is/git-app
oc rollout history deployment/git-app
oc get events --sort-by=.lastTimestamp

10. Trainer demonstration

1. Review a simple Git repository.
2. Deploy the selected branch with oc new-app.
3. Follow build logs and identify the output image.
4. Expose the service and test the route.
5. Change a visible application value and push a commit.
6. trigger a build manually or through a webhook.
7. Watch the new rollout and verify the changed response.
8. Show where failure evidence appears in both CLI and Web Console.

Knowledge check

- Why should credentials be stored in a Secret?
- What is the purpose of contextDir?
- Does a successful Git webhook prove that the build succeeded?
- How can you prove which image digest a pod is running?
- Why promote a tested image instead of rebuilding independently in every environment?

Trainer closing line

Git integration connects developer activity to repeatable platform builds. The important operational skill is tracing one change through every stage: commit, build, image, rollout, pod, and user-visible result.

EXTENDED FACILITATOR NOTES

Recommended teaching time: 30 minutes
Suggested balance: 10 minutes explanation, 10 minutes demonstration, 7 minutes paired activity, 3 minutes review.

The three Git integration models

Explain that teams commonly use one of three patterns:

1. OpenShift-native source build: BuildConfig clones Git and creates the image.
2. External CI: Another system tests/builds the image and pushes it to a registry; OpenShift deploys the approved image.
3. GitOps: Git stores desired deployment configuration; a controller reconciles the cluster to that state.

These patterns can coexist. Avoid presenting oc new-app as the complete enterprise delivery model. It is an excellent way to understand the primitives and to bootstrap applications.

Branch, tag, commit, and environment

A branch is convenient but mutable. A Git tag may also be movable unless protected. A commit SHA is immutable and therefore stronger evidence of exactly what was built. A mature application should expose build information such as version and commit SHA without leaking sensitive details.

Ask participants: “If production is rebuilt from the same branch one week later, is it guaranteed to produce the same image?” Expected answer: not necessarily—dependencies, builder images, package repositories, or the branch itself may have changed. This leads naturally to immutable image promotion.

Private repository walkthrough

Explain the authentication path without showing credentials:

Build pod -> source Secret -> Git server

Demonstrate Secret metadata and BuildConfig reference only. Point out that linking a Secret to a service account and referencing sourceSecret serve different purposes depending on the workflow. Use least privilege and organisation-approved credential types.

Webhook teaching sequence

1. Show the BuildConfig webhook trigger.
2. Show the Git provider delivery configuration.
3. Push a small commit.
4. Watch a new Build appear.
5. Inspect delivery status if nothing happens.
6. Prove which commit the Build used.

Emphasise that a webhook returning success only proves receipt of the event. Build, image push, and rollout can still fail independently.

End-to-end proof checklist

Ask participants to collect:

- Git commit SHA.
- Build name and Complete status.
- Output image digest.
- Deployment revision.
- Pod imageID.
- User-visible version from the Route.

This creates a chain of evidence instead of relying on timestamps or visual assumptions.

Paired activity

Partner A plays the developer and identifies a commit. Partner B plays the operator and proves whether that commit reached the running application. They must use at least three cluster resources in their explanation.

Failure conversation

Present these symptoms one at a time and ask which layer owns the evidence:

- Webhook delivery failed: Git provider/network/API endpoint.
- Build could not clone: Build/source authentication.
- Build compiled but image push failed: Registry/output credentials or quota.
- Image exists but no rollout occurred: image trigger/deployment automation.
- Rollout completed but application shows old content: caching, wrong branch/context, or misleading application version.

Operational practices to reinforce

- Protect main and release branches.
- Keep environment configuration outside application source where appropriate.
- Do not embed credentials in clone URLs.
- Record provenance from source commit to image digest.
- Test before promotion.
- Use separate service accounts and permissions for build and runtime responsibilities.
- Define a rollback path before automating forward deployment.

Transition to Topic 3

“The new version is running. The next question is whether one instance is enough—and what must be true before adding more copies is safe.”
