INTRODUCTION TO TEMPLATES AND DEPLOYMENT AUTOMATION

Workshop objective
You should be able to explain declarative deployment automation, render and review an OpenShift Template safely, distinguish a Template from newer GitOps-style workflows, and identify the controls that make repeatable delivery safe.

1. Declarative intent and repeatability

A deployment definition states the desired resources: Deployment, Service, Route, ConfigMap, Secret reference, ServiceAccount, NetworkPolicy, and resource settings. Automation applies a reviewed version of that intent consistently. The goal is not merely speed; it is reproducibility, auditability, and safe promotion.

An OpenShift Template packages parameterised Kubernetes/OpenShift objects. Processing substitutes parameters and produces ordinary API objects. Once created, those objects are managed as normal resources; changing the template file alone does not update them.

2. Template anatomy

Typical fields are `apiVersion: template.openshift.io/v1`, `kind: Template`, metadata, parameters, optional labels, and `objects`. Parameters should describe safe configuration such as application name, image reference, replica count, or environment-specific hostname. Do not make Secrets literal parameter values: they can surface in shell history, processed output, Git, or logs.

3. Inspect before creating

Never pipe an unreviewed template straight into creation in a production project. First render and inspect it:

oc process -f app-template.yaml -p NAME=catalog -p IMAGE=registry.example/cat@sha256:<digest> > rendered.yaml
oc apply --dry-run=client -f rendered.yaml -o yaml
oc diff -f rendered.yaml
oc create -f rendered.yaml

Use `oc apply` rather than `oc create` only when its ownership and lifecycle semantics match the team's process. `oc diff` needs appropriate server access and does not replace peer review or policy checks.

4. A minimal safe pattern

Parameterise an immutable image digest, namespace-safe names, non-secret configuration references, and resource values that have been tested. Declare probes, limits/requests, labels, and ownership. Keep environment-specific differences small and explicit. Store definitions in version control, review changes, and make the rendered result available as release evidence.

5. Real-world scenario: configuration drift

The test environment was created from a template six months ago. Production has an extra NetworkPolicy and a different readiness path edited through the Console during an incident. A new release works in test but fails in production.

Investigation:

1. Export and normalise relevant manifests from both environments.
2. Compare desired Git definitions with the live objects; ignore server-generated fields.
3. Identify whether differences are intentional, emergency changes, or accidental drift.
4. Put the accepted production configuration under review in the source of truth.
5. Test the reconciled definition in a lower environment, then promote through the approved process.

The prevention is not "never fix production." It is to capture an approved emergency change promptly so desired state does not become fiction.

6. Templates, Helm, Kustomize, and GitOps

Templates are OpenShift-native parameterised object bundles. Helm packages chart templates and release values. Kustomize applies overlays/patches to a base. GitOps tools continuously reconcile a declared Git state to clusters. They solve overlapping but not identical problems. Choose one clear ownership model per resource to avoid two automation systems fighting each other.

7. Deployment automation controls

- Build once and deploy the same image digest through environments.
- Review source changes and generated manifests.
- Validate schema, policies, and security context before promotion.
- Separate CI build credentials from environment deployment credentials.
- Use rollout status and application smoke tests as evidence.
- Define rollback or forward-fix decisions before a high-risk change.
- Record the revision, digest, parameters (excluding secrets), actor, and target environment.

8. Lab prompt

Create a harmless Template for a `hello-operations` service in a sandbox project. Include a Deployment, Service, route only if allowed, resource requests/limits, readiness probe, and labels. Render it with an immutable image reference. Review the generated objects before applying. Then change only the replica parameter, render a second version, and explain the observed diff.

Knowledge check

- What happens to existing resources when a Template file is edited?
- Why should a release use an image digest rather than `latest`?
- What is the risk of two reconcilers owning the same Deployment?
- Which values should not be passed as Template parameters?

Summary

Templates make common deployments repeatable, but safe automation depends on review, immutable inputs, least privilege, validation, and a clear source of truth.
