DEVELOPER TOOLING AND LOCAL INTEGRATION OPTIONS

Workshop objective
You should be able to choose a local development workflow that preserves production parity where it matters, connect tools to OpenShift safely, and know when local convenience becomes a security or reproducibility risk.

1. Local development is not a second production

Developers need fast feedback, debugging, tests, and realistic integration points. A laptop cannot reproduce every cluster characteristic: OpenShift security constraints, ingress, service mesh, storage, quotas, RBAC, node topology, and managed dependencies may differ. Use local tools to shorten feedback loops, then validate in a controlled integration environment.

2. Core tool choices

- `oc`: OpenShift CLI for authenticated cluster inspection and resource workflows.
- `kubectl`: Kubernetes CLI; useful where commands are portable, but OpenShift-specific features use `oc`.
- `odo`: developer-focused workflows where installed and supported by the team.
- Podman/containers: build and run images locally without assuming Docker daemon behaviour.
- IDE extensions: YAML schema assistance, Kubernetes/OpenShift views, log access, and debug configuration. Review their credential handling.
- `oc port-forward`: temporary local access to an authorised in-cluster service.
- Local Kubernetes/OpenShift variants: useful for learning and isolated tests, not proof that a production deployment is valid.

3. Safe cluster connection

Use an approved login method and endpoint. Avoid sharing kubeconfig files, copying bearer tokens into chat, or keeping broad tokens on unmanaged devices. Check context before every operation:

oc whoami
oc whoami --show-server
oc project
oc get projects

Use separate contexts for development, test, and production. A clear prompt and least privilege reduce accidental changes to the wrong cluster.

4. Local-to-cluster integration patterns

Port-forward for a short, authorised diagnostic path:

oc port-forward service/catalog-api 8080:8080

Then test `http://localhost:8080` from the same machine. This does not expose a service to teammates or reproduce an external Route, TLS termination, NetworkPolicy, or load balancer path.

Remote debugging or sync tools can accelerate diagnosis, but treat them as privileged access. Limit scope and duration, use non-production first, and ensure debug configuration cannot expose environment variables, tokens, or customer data.

5. Real-time scenario: works on laptop, fails in OpenShift

An image starts locally as root and writes a cache under `/var/cache/app`. In OpenShift, the pod fails because the platform runs the image with an arbitrary non-root UID and the directory is not writable.

Evidence and correction:

1. Inspect the pod event and termination logs.
2. Reproduce locally using a non-root user where possible.
3. Change the image so application directories are group-writable by the expected runtime group or use a writable mounted location, without weakening security context.
4. Rebuild with an immutable tag/digest and test in a sandbox project.
5. Validate that no `runAsUser: 0` exception or overbroad SCC was added merely to pass the test.

This is production parity in the right place: image ownership and arbitrary-UID compatibility.

6. Configuration and secrets locally

Use development-only values and a secret manager or approved local mechanism. Never commit `.env` files with real credentials, export production Secret values into a terminal transcript, or make production databases reachable from a casual local environment. If an integration needs sensitive data, use a masked, approved sandbox and an explicit access path.

7. A practical inner-loop model

1. Lint, unit test, and dependency scan locally.
2. Build a reproducible image and test it as non-root.
3. Deploy the same image to a personal or shared sandbox project through reviewed manifests.
4. Run contract/integration tests against approved services.
5. Promote the recorded immutable artifact through CI/CD; do not rebuild a different image on the release path.

8. Tooling decision questions

- Does this tool store credentials, and where?
- Does it reproduce the relevant OpenShift constraint or hide it?
- Can its operation be repeated by CI and another developer?
- What project, namespace, network, and data can it reach?
- How will its temporary access be stopped and audited?

Knowledge check

- What does `oc port-forward` prove and not prove?
- Why is an image that runs as root locally a possible OpenShift issue?
- Which test belongs locally, and which needs a sandbox project?
- Why should release promotion use the same image digest built earlier?

Summary

Developer tooling should make feedback fast without creating a shadow production environment. Use local tests for speed, sandbox clusters for integration and platform behaviour, and immutable artifacts to connect the two.
